---
title: A Cross-country Analysis of Vulnerability to Natural Hazards Using Principal Component Regression
excerpt: "(Undergraduate Thesis) Genetic algorithm was used to minimize the flooding vulnerability in the city of Urdaneta in Pangasinan. MATLAB was used to run the genetic algorithm."
modified: 04/6/2020, 15:00:00
tags: [intro, beginner, jekyll, tutorial]
comments: true
category: blog
---
#### Full Paper can be accessed <u>[here](https://github.com/edwardnataniel/edwardnataniel.github.io/blob/master/files/Stat226_Case_Study_Apostol.pdf)</u>.
<a href="https://github.com/edwardnataniel/edwardnataniel.github.io/blob/master/files/Stat226_Case_Study_Apostol.pdf"> https://github.com/edwardnataniel/edwardnataniel.github.io/blob/master/files/Stat226_Case_Study_Apostol.pdf </a>

## Overview
This research aims to build a parsimonious model that explains a country’s vulnerability to extreme natural events using socio-economic indicators. The indicators used in this study are the following: exposure index, GDP per capita, health expenditure per capita,  percentage of internet users, literacy rate, mortality rate from common diseases, percentage of females in the population, percentage of population under poverty, percentage of tertiary school enrollment, unemployment rate, urban population, percentage of population using at least basic drinking water services, and percentage of working age population.  

Due to a high degree of association among the socio-economic indicators, **principal component analysis** was used to derive a new and smaller set of uncorrelated variables called **PCs (Principal Components)**. **Multiple linear regression** was run with the derived PCs as the independent variables and the vulnerability scores as the dependent variable.
Three of the five principal components were found to be significant, namely, quality of life, percentage of women in the population, and urban population. The findings of this study may help the ongoing disaster risk reduction efforts of national and local communities.

## Introduction

Some countries are more exposed to certain natural hazards due to their geographical location. However, exposure, intensity, and duration of natural hazards alone will not determine its overall impact to a certain country or community. Some communities may be able to recover relatively quickly than others, while some may only have limited capabilities to cope with disasters. Exposure must be examined in conjunction with **vulnerability**, a multifaceted concept related to the societal factors and economic structures within a community that makes it susceptible to the negative impacts of natural hazards.


